{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw24480\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww20740\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Project 3 Concept \
\
____________ \
\
For this project I decided to focus on a series of speakers that mainly focus on design for the social good. Since my focus is on design as advocacy, this sparks \'91change\'92. Within the site, I decided to focus on how scrolling since this is the most basic function as well as the most immediate response when landing on any webpage. In terms of advocacy, it can be argued that manipulating the scroll as a way of insueing \'91change\'92 in the most immediate way. \
\
Speakers: \
\
1. Cynthia Smith: \
\
Is a curator at Cooper Hewitt and who\'92s research mainly focuses on socially responsible design, giving an overview of morals and how design can be used as a tool to promulgate a dialog for improvement of community. \
\
2. Center for Urban Peddegogy: \
Based in new york, this group of individuals ( not necessarily all designers ) but the majority of their work is based on the dissemination of information to those that who do not have access to such \
resources. They help communities get information that is not necessarily easy to access in a digestible way. This directly links to the impact of graphic design and how communication is important for communities who need information to survive in modern day society. \
\
3. Amy Smith : \
Is the founder of the D-Lab at MIT. Her work mainly involves the impact of science,design and engineering can play an impact on impoverished communities who do not have access to basic resources. Her work  is a prime example of how design and science be combined in order to better the lives of people in a direct way. \
\
\
\
}